Memgraph in production guides (general and GraphRAG) (#1239)
memgraph/documentation: pages/memgraph-in-production/memgraph-in-graphrag.mdx

---
title: Memgraph in GraphRAG use cases
description: Suggestions on how to bring your Memgraph to production in GraphRAG use cases. 
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'
import { CommunityLinks } from '/components/social-card/CommunityLinks'

# Memgraph in GraphRAG use cases

<Callout type="info">
👉 **Start here first**  
Before diving into this guide, we recommend starting with the [**General suggestions**](/memgraph-in-production/general-suggestions) 
page. It provides **foundational, use-case-agnostic advice** for deploying Memgraph in production.

This guide builds on that foundation, offering **additional recommendations tailored to specific workloads**. 

> In cases where guidance overlaps, the information in this chapter should be seen as **complementary or overriding**, depending 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where guidance overlaps, consider the information here as **complementary or overriding**, depending 

```

on the unique needs of your use case.
</Callout>

> ## When to use this guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Is this guide for you?

```

This guide is for you if you're exploring or building **GraphRAG (Graph-Augmented Retrieval-Augmented Generation)** systems.

> Consider diving into this guide when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll benefit from this content if:

```

- 💬 You want to **query your graph using natural language** through a proxy **LLM** interface.  

> - 🔄 You need to **seamlessly extract knowledge graphs from multiple source systems**, especially when graph representation 
>   naturally suits the data structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔄 You need to **seamlessly extract knowledge graphs from multiple source systems**, especially when a graph structure naturally fits the data.

```

- 🏢 You're building a system where **business stakeholders need fast insights** without relying on engineers to expose data through APIs.  
- 🌙 Your engineers are **deep in the trenches at midnight**, and you'd rather they write **simple questions** instead of Cypher queries.  
- 🧠 You have **embeddings** and need to perform **vector search** across your graph, along with structured Cypher query language expressiveness.  

If any of these resonate with your project, this guide will walk you through the best practices and configurations to bring 
GraphRAG to life using Memgraph.

> ## Why should you choose Memgraph for GraphRAG use cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why choose Memgraph for GraphRAG use cases?

```

Choosing Memgraph for your GraphRAG use case means prioritizing **performance**, **scalability**, and a **smooth end-user experience**.
Memgraph is currently the **most performant and scalable graph database** on the market—your business stakeholders won’t be happy
waiting unreasonable amounts of time for answers, and with Memgraph, they won’t have to. You can explore our performance results in
the [**Benchgraph benchmarks**](https://memgraph.com/benchgraph).

> Thanks to its **in-memory architecture**, Memgraph delivers **predictable response times**, avoiding the inconsistency of LRU cache
> strategies that sometimes hit disk and degrade performance.
> 
> With built-in **vector search powered by [usearch](https://github.com/unum-cloud/usearch)**, Memgraph supports **high-performance retrieval**
> across all your GraphRAG workloads. It also acts as a **unified analytical engine**, connecting to **legacy systems** and supporting a wide range
> of **data ingestion sources** to populate your knowledge graph with ease.
> 
> Memgraph makes **schema metadata accessible in constant time**, allowing your LLM to construct Cypher queries **efficiently and without overhead**.
> To ensure a secure environment, Memgraph also provides **role-based and fine-grained access controls**, including **read-only access**, so your
> GraphRAG queries never risk modifying your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's what makes Memgraph a perfect fit for GraphRAG:
- **In-memory architecture**: Delivers consistent, **predictable response times**, avoiding the inconsistency of disk-based caching strategies like LRU.
- **Built-in Vector search (powered by [usearch](https://github.com/unum-cloud/usearch))**: Supports **high-performance retrieval** across all your GraphRAG workloads.
- **Unified analytical engine**: Seamlessly integrates with **legacy systems** and supports a wide range of **data ingestion sources** to populate your knowledge graph with ease.
- **Instant schema metadata access**: Makes **schema metadata accessible in constant time**, allowing your LLM to construct Cypher queries **efficiently and without overhead**.
- **Enterprise-grade access control**:  Secure your data with **role-based permissions**, including **read-only access**, so your GraphRAG queries never risk modifying your data.

```

## What is covered?

The suggestions for GraphRAG use cases **complement** several key sections in the 

> [**general suggestions guide**](/memgraph-in-production/general-suggestions). These sections offer important context and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[general suggestions guide](/memgraph-in-production/general-suggestions). These sections offer important context and

```

additional best practices tailored for performance, stability, and scalability in GraphRAG systems:

> - **[Hardware sizing](#hardware-sizing)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Hardware sizing](#hardware-sizing)  

```

  If you're using embeddings for vector search, be aware that they can significantly impact **memory consumption**.

> - **[Choosing the right Memgraph flag set](#choosing-the-right-memgraph-flag-set)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Choosing the right Memgraph flag set](#choosing-the-right-memgraph-flag-set)

```

  Configure runtime flags to enable **constant-time schema retrieval** for the LLM. This reduces overhead during `text2Cypher` construction.

> - **[Choosing the right Memgraph storage mode](#choosing-the-right-memgraph-storage-mode)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Choosing the right Memgraph storage mode](#choosing-the-right-memgraph-storage-mode)  

```

  Guidance on selecting the optimal **storage mode** for GraphRAG use cases, depending on whether your focus is analytical speed or transactional safety.

> - **[Enterprise features you might require](#enterprise-features-you-might-require)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Enterprise features you might require](#enterprise-features-you-might-require)  

```

  Understand which **enterprise features** — such as security, access controls, and dynamic graph algorithms are 
  essential for production-ready GraphRAG deployments.

> - **[Queries that best suit your workload](#queries-that-best-suit-your-workload)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Queries that best suit your workload](#queries-that-best-suit-your-workload)  

```

  Learn how to use **deep path traversals**, **vector search**, and **dynamic MAGE algorithms** to efficiently retrieve contextual data and 
  handle **high-velocity graphs**.

> - **[Memgraph ecosystem](#memgraph-ecosystem)**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Memgraph ecosystem](#memgraph-ecosystem)  

```

  Explore the tools and integrations within the **Memgraph ecosystem** that can accelerate the development and operation of your GraphRAG pipeline.

## Hardware sizing

If your GraphRAG use case involves **vector embeddings**, it’s important to account for their **impact on memory usage**. Currently, 
Memgraph stores embeddings in two places:

1. In its **proprietary in-memory property storage** using 8 bytes per float.
2. In the **vector index (usearch)** using 4 bytes per float (float32).

This results in a total **12-byte overhead per float value** when storing embeddings.

To estimate the additional memory required for embeddings, use the following formula:

```
number of nodes with embeddings × embedding dimension × 12B
```

This will give you a more accurate view of your memory needs when planning hardware resources.

### Upcoming optimizations

Memgraph is actively working on two short-term optimizations to reduce this memory overhead:

- 🧭 **Reference-based indexing**: Embeddings will be stored only in the vector index, with the property storage holding just a reference. 
  Since embeddings are used exclusively for vector search, this eliminates duplication.
  

> - ⚙️ **Support for float16 in usearch**: Users will be able to store embeddings as 2-byte floats (float16), commonly used in neural networks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ⚙️ **Support for float16 in usearch**: Users will be able to store embeddings as 2-byte floats (`float16`), commonly used in neural networks. 

```

  This reduces memory usage significantly while maintaining accuracy within a **\<1% margin**, making it a strong tradeoff for most applications.

### Best practices

> - Consider the **appropriate embedding dimension** for your use case. While models like OpenAI use 1536 or 3072 dimensions, **lower-dimensional vectors
>   (e.g., 512 or 768)** often result in only a **5–6% drop in accuracy** and drastically reduce memory consumption.
> 
> - If in-memory embedding storage is too demanding, you can **offload embeddings to a third-party vector database** and still integrate it 
>   into your GraphRAG pipeline alongside Memgraph.
> 
> - If you're also storing **document context** in Memgraph, keep in mind that these long strings are currently stored in memory as well. A short-term
>   roadmap item will enable **offloading static text content to disk**, since these strings rarely change. This will further 
>   **increase your memory efficiency and scalability**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Choose the right embedding dimension**:
While models like OpenAI use 1536 or 3072 dimensions, **lower-dimensional vectors like 512 or 768** often result in only a **5–6% drop in accuracy** and drastically reduce memory consumption.
- **Offload if needed**: If in-memory embedding storage is too demanding, you can **offload embeddings to a third-party vector database** and still integrate it 
  into your GraphRAG pipeline alongside Memgraph.
- **Watch for string context size**: If you're also storing **document context** in Memgraph, keep in mind that these long strings are currently stored in memory as well. A short-term
  roadmap item will enable **offloading static text content to disk**, since these strings rarely change. This will further 
  **increase your memory efficiency and scalability**.

```

  This enables defining access rules at the **label and edge type level**, so users can only view and query the parts of the 
  graph that are relevant to them—ensuring **data isolation and privacy** across teams or tenants.

- 🔐 **SSO support for GraphChat**  
  If you're using **GraphChat** inside **Memgraph Lab** to power LLM-based querying, 
  [single sign-on (SSO)](/database-management/authentication-and-authorization/auth-system-integrations#single-sign-on) makes it easy 
  to integrate with your existing identity provider and streamline user access across your organization.

- 🔄 **Dynamic graph algorithms**  
  In scenarios where the graph is **changing in real-time** and you need **continuous summarization or insights**, Memgraph 
  provides enterprise-only [dynamic graph algorithms](/advanced-algorithms/available-algorithms#dynamic-graph-algorithms-enterprise), 
  such as **online community detection**. These allow your GraphRAG pipeline to stay up-to-date with evolving data without expensive 
  full re-computation.

## Queries that best suit your workload

> When integrating Memgraph into open-source GraphRAG frameworks like **LlamaIndex** or **LangGraph**, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When integrating Memgraph into open-source GraphRAG frameworks like [LlamaIndex](/ai-ecosystem/integrations#llamaindex),  [LangGraph](/ai-ecosystem/integrations#langchain) or [MCP](/ai-ecosystem/integrations#model-context-protocol-mcp), 

```
